TxSummary digest (#52)
mobilecoinfoundation/mcips: text/0052-tx-summary-digest.md

noticeably, and will greatly increase the complexity of implementation, because the device
has much less memory than this and would have to use some kind of "windowing" strategy
to compute the hash.

On the other hand, if the digest that the Ring MLSAGs sign is changed as proposed, then
we only need to send 32 bytes followed by the `TxSummary` to prove to the device where
the digest that the MLSAG's are signing comes from, and so what the outcome of the `Tx` is.
So we can avoid sending all merkle proofs, bulletproofs, encrypted fog hints, memos, etc.
and reduce the traffic with the device by perhaps a factor of 10 or so in the worst case,
as well as reducing the implementation complexity.

# Guide-level explanation
[guide-level-explanation]: #guide-level-explanation

A `TxSummary` is an object much like the `TxPrefix`, but where instead of the `TxIn`
objects, the corresponding `pseudo_output_commitments` are stored.

There is exactly one possible `TxSummary` for a given `Tx`.

The `TxSummary` contains:
* The list of outputs (omitting "extra" parts like encrypted fog hint and encrypted memo).
* The list of pseudo_output_commitments (commitments to the values of the true inputs)

>   * Any input rules associated to these inputs (if they are [MCIP 42](https://github.com/mobilecoinfoundation/mcips/pull/42) signed contingent inputs)

Reviewer: Isn't there a concern that these rules might also be large, since they contain complete `TxOut`s?

Author: yeah probably we don't need all the rules -- maybe we just need like, the indices of the TxOut's that actually were relevant to this SCI

good point, thanks

- Feature Name: tx_summary_digest
- Start Date: 2022-10-08
- MCIP PR: [mobilecoinfoundation/mcips#0052](https://github.com/mobilecoinfoundation/mcips/pull/0052)
- Tracking Issue: [mobilecoinfoundation/mobilecoin#2686](https://github.com/mobilecoinfoundation/mobilecoin/issues/2686)

# Summary
[summary]: #summary

> Introduce an object called `TxSummary` which is significantly smaller than a `Tx`,

Reviewer 2: Nit: "an object called" doesn't add much
```suggestion
Introduce a `TxSummary` that is significantly smaller than a `Tx`,
```

but which with small additional data can be used to verify the values of inputs
and outputs, and the destinations of the outputs, when a device is asked to sign
a `RingMLSAG` for a new transaction.

Where previously the `extended_message_digest` is signed by Ring MLSAGs
in a transaction, now a new digest formed using that digest and the `TxSummary` will
be signed instead.

# Motivation
[motivation]: #motivation

Hardware wallets such as Ledger have an expectation that when the user signs a
transaction, the device can display information about how much money will be sent
to what addresses as a result of this transaction, and that the device can verify
that this information is correct.

However, with the status quo, the only way that this can be accomplished is to put
the entire `Tx` on the device so that it can verify the `extended_message_digest`,
because the `extended_message_digest` is the only thing that connects the `MLSAG`
that the device is signing to the rest of the `Tx`.

> This increases the amount of data that has to be sent to the device from a few kb
> to `> 100kb` in the worst case. This is because Merkle proofs are each e.g. 40 bytes

Reviewer 2: Nit: Capitalize KB
```suggestion
This increases the amount of data that has to be sent to the device from a few KB
to >100 KB in the worst case. This is because Merkle proofs are each ~40 bytes
```

noticeably, and will greatly increase the complexity of implementation, because the device
has much less memory than this and would have to use some kind of "windowing" strategy
to compute the hash.

On the other hand, if the digest that the Ring MLSAGs sign is changed as proposed, then
we only need to send 32 bytes followed by the `TxSummary` to prove to the device where
the digest that the MLSAG's are signing comes from, and so what the outcome of the `Tx` is.
So we can avoid sending all merkle proofs, bulletproofs, encrypted fog hints, memos, etc.
and reduce the traffic with the device by perhaps a factor of 10 or so in the worst case,
as well as reducing the implementation complexity.

# Guide-level explanation
[guide-level-explanation]: #guide-level-explanation

A `TxSummary` is an object much like the `TxPrefix`, but where instead of the `TxIn`
objects, the corresponding `pseudo_output_commitments` are stored.

There is exactly one possible `TxSummary` for a given `Tx`.

The `TxSummary` contains:
* The list of outputs (omitting "extra" parts like encrypted fog hint and encrypted memo).
* The list of pseudo_output_commitments (commitments to the values of the true inputs)

>   * Any input rules associated to these inputs (if they are [MCIP 31](https://github.com/mobilecoinfoundation/mcips/pull/31) signed contingent inputs)

Reviewer 2: Optional/Equivalent: Link to the doc rather than PR
```suggestion
  * Any input rules associated to these inputs (if they are [MCIP 31](0031-transactions-with-contingent-inputs.md) signed contingent inputs)
```

* The fee and fee token id
* The tombstone block

During transaction construction, the signer computes the extended message digest as before,
but now creates a merlin transcript using that 32-byte digest, followed by digesting the
`TxSummary`. The MLSAG's (except for SCIs) will sign 32-bytes extracted from this digest.
The verifier similarly computes this
`extended-message-and-tx-summary digest` and verifies that the MLSAGs sign this.

When a hardware wallet is asked to sign an MLSAG, we can give it now the `extended_message_digest`

> and the `TxSummary`, and it can compute the appropriate digest from this for the MLSAG to sign.

Author: does the rust merlin implementation not work? can we just fix that one?

extended_message.append_to_transcript(b"extended_message", &mut transcript);
tx_summary.append_to_transcript(b"tx_summary", &mut transcript);

let mut extended_message_and_tx_summary_digest = [0u8; 32];
transcript.extract_digest(&mut extended_message_and_tx_summary_digest);
```

This digest is computable given only the 32 byte `extended_message_digest`, and the
`TxSummary`, which are together much smaller than an entire `Tx`.

The `TxSummary` is a new object with the following schema.

```mermaid
classDiagram
direction BT
TxOutSummary --> TxSummary
TxInSummary --> TxSummary
TxSummary: Vec~TxOutSummary~ outputs
TxSummary: Vec~TxInSummary~ inputs
TxSummary: uint64 fee_value
TxSummary: uint64 fee_token_id
TxSummary: uint64 tombstone_block
TxSummary: new(&TxPrefix, &[TxInSummary])
TxOutSummary: CompressedRistrettoPublic public_key
TxOutSummary: CompressedRistrettoPublic target_key
TxOutSummary: MaskedAmount masked_amount
TxOutSummary: from(&TxOut)
TxInSummary: CompressedCommitment pseudo_output_commitment
TxInSummary: Option~InputRules~ input_rules
```

A hardware wallet which is asked to sign an MLSAG can expect to see that 32 byte digest
and the `TxSummary`.

> **Security**:

Reviewer 2: This merits a header IMO
```suggestion
## Security
```

From a security point of view, the hardware wallet can know that it is intractable
for someone to find a different `TxSummary` that produces the same `extended_message_and_tx_summary` digest,
so if it signs the MLSAG, this is the only thing that it can be committing to.
The hardware wallet also knows how the validators will compute the `extended_message_and_tx_summary` digest
based on the `Tx`, and knows that it is infeasible for anyone to find another `Tx` that has the same digest here.
So, an attacker (on the computer) could give the device an improperly formed `TxSummary` and lie to the device
this way, but the attacker will not be able to get consensus to accept those signatures. The device therefore

> knows that the either the `TxSummary` is accurate, or it's signature doesn't matter because the `Tx` will not

Reviewer 3: :upside_down_face: 
```suggestion
knows that either the `TxSummary` is accurate, or it's signature doesn't matter because the `Tx` will not
```

Although it is inelegant to hash a bunch of stuff a second time, in practical terms, the cost of doing this is very low.

There are many things that are inelegant about our current `Tx` structure. It is inelegant that the `TxPrefix` hash is not
the only thing that MLSAG's sign and that extra stuff from `SignatureRctBulletproofs` is signed. It would be better if this
`TxSummary` object *were* the `TxPrefix` to some extent, and the merkle proofs, bulletproofs, and other extra stuff were
digested before that. Then we would not need to have an extra round of hashing things at the end.

However, we do not propose at this time to completely change the `Tx` structure to fix these issues, as this would be
a very complicated breaking change.

Instead, we view this current proposal as the simplest and most straightforward proposal that will meet the needs of
hardware wallets and help them to avoid complexities around streaming too much data and having to create a state machine to
compute a proper merlin digest of the entire `Tx` object, which would also make the user experience significantly slower.

> ## SCI support, definition of `TxSummaryUnblindingData`.

Reviewer 2: Nit: The other headings do not end in a period
```suggestion
## SCI support, definition of `TxSummaryUnblindingData`
```

> We have tried to future-proof this design against [MCIP 31](https://github.com/mobilecoinfoundation/mcips/pull/31) Signed Contingent Inputs being present in the `Tx`.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
We have tried to future-proof this design against [MCIP 31](0031-transactions-with-contingent-inputs.md) Signed Contingent Inputs being present in the `Tx`.
```

```rust
let mut transcript =
    MerlinTranscript::new(EXTENDED_MESSAGE_AND_TX_SUMMARY_DOMAIN_TAG.as_bytes());
extended_message.append_to_transcript(b"extended_message", &mut transcript);
tx_summary.append_to_transcript(b"tx_summary", &mut transcript);

let mut extended_message_and_tx_summary_digest = [0u8; 32];
transcript.extract_digest(&mut extended_message_and_tx_summary_digest);
```

This digest is computable given only the 32 byte `extended_message_digest`, and the
`TxSummary`, which are together much smaller than an entire `Tx`.

The `TxSummary` is a new object with the following schema.

```mermaid
classDiagram
direction BT
TxOutSummary --> TxSummary
TxInSummary --> TxSummary
TxSummary: Vec~TxOutSummary~ outputs
TxSummary: Vec~TxInSummary~ inputs
TxSummary: uint64 fee_value
TxSummary: uint64 fee_token_id
TxSummary: uint64 tombstone_block
TxSummary: new(&TxPrefix, &[CompressedCommitment])
TxOutSummary: CompressedRistrettoPublic public_key
TxOutSummary: CompressedRistrettoPublic target_key
TxOutSummary: MaskedAmount masked_amount
TxOutSummary: bool associated_to_input_rules
TxInSummary: CompressedCommitment pseudo_output_commitment

> TxInSummary: bool has_input_rules

Author: Ryan made a suggestion that, maybe the `TxInSummary` should include a digest of the input rules rather than just this flag. Then if later, we think it's important to pass all the rules, we can do so without an enclave change. So it's a bit more future proof, and the cost in terms of wire protocol seems very low.

So we can avoid sending all Merkle proofs, bulletproofs, encrypted fog hints, memos, etc.
and reduce the traffic with the device by perhaps a factor of 10 or so in the worst case,
as well as reducing the implementation complexity.

# Guide-level explanation
[guide-level-explanation]: #guide-level-explanation

A `TxSummary` is an object much like the `TxPrefix`, with small but important differences
in exactly what data are stored about inputs and outputs.

The purpose of a `TxSummary` is that:
* It is much smaller than a `Tx`.
* It can be streamed to a small hardware device, together with the `extended_message_digest`,
  in order to efficiently compute the (new) digest which MLSAG's must sign.
* Small additional data (`TxSummaryUnblindingData`) can be streamed with the pieces of the `TxSummary`, allowing
  the device to "unblind" the `TxSummary`.
* This can be used to create a `TxSummaryUnblindingReport`, which deduces the following:
  * For each output, the amount, and the entity to which it is destined, which is one of three possibilities:
    * The signer themselves
    * A known contact, identified by their public address
    * An anonymous swap counterparty

>   * For each input, the amount, and the entity from whcih it came, which is one of two possibilities:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  * For each input, the amount, and the entity from which it came, which is one of two possibilities:
```

During transaction construction, the signer:
1. Computes the `extended-message-digest` as before
1. Creates a merlin transcript, appending that digest (using the `mc-crypto-digestible-scheme`)
1. Appends `TxSummary` (using the `mc-crypto-digestible` scheme)
1. Extracts 32 bytes from this digest, the `extended-message-and-tx-summary-digest`.

The MLSAG's (except for SCIs) will now sign this digest (instead of the `extended-message-digest` as previously).

The transaction verifier similarly computes this
`extended-message-and-tx-summary digest` and verifies that the MLSAGs sign this.

**Note**: This means that the `TxSummary` needs to be constructible by the consensus enclave, given only
the `Tx`, and therefore cannot contain any of the transaction secrets needed to unblind the `TxSummary`. These
secrets appear in `TxSummaryUnblindingData` instead. The host computer (ultimately the `TransactionBuilder`)
is responsible to compute this when it creates
a `Tx`, and then it can be streamed to, and verified by, the hardware device which is asked to sign.

When a hardware wallet is asked to sign an MLSAG, we can give it now the `extended_message_digest`

> and steam it the `TxSummary` and the `TxSummaryUnblindingData`, and it can compute the appropriate digest from this for the MLSAG to sign.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
and stream it the `TxSummary` and the `TxSummaryUnblindingData`, and it can compute the appropriate digest from this for the MLSAG to sign.
```

  the call to `TxOut::new` enough to reproduce the `TxOut` public key, the `TxOut` target key, and the `TxOut` masked amount.
  If all of these are a match for the `TxOutSummary`, then the device has established that the `TxOut` was originally addressed to
  this person with this amount -- it is discrete-log hard to find another amount with the same commitment. It is also generally
  impossible to make a TxOut that belongs to two addresses -- starting from two addresses with different view public keys,
  finding two different tx_private keys that produce the same tx out public key implies knowledge of a linear relation between
  the view private keys. Also obtaining a collision of tx target keys requires finding a hash collision which has negligible success
  probability.
* In the final case, the `TxOutUnblindingData` doesn't contain an address or `tx_private_key`. This can occur normally when the `TxOut`
  was not created using `TransactionBuilder.add_output` interface, but rather
  came as a required (or partial fill) output from a Signed Contingent Input which was added to the `Tx`.

>   In this case it is not addressed to ourself, and due to the anonyminity properties of the MCIP 31 atomic swaps, we cannot know who

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  In this case it is not addressed to ourself, and due to the anonymity properties of the MCIP 31 atomic swaps, we cannot know who
```

  This include the value, token id, and blinding factor corresponding to the pseudo-output commitment.
  We can compute the corresponding Pedersen commitment to these deterministically, and check if this matches
  the pseudo-output commitment in the `TxInSummary`. This came from the `TxSummary` which is checked by the enclave,
  and so we know that it must be accurate. If we manage to unblind it, then we know this is the correct unblinding,
  because it is discrete-log hard to find another unmasking of the Pedersen commitment. If we can't unblind it, then
  the hardware device knows that the computer has lied / provided a false unmasking, but there is no legitimate reason
  for the computer to fail to do this, because regardless of whether this is our own input or a signed input from a
  counterparty, we can expect to have the unmasked amount or there is no way we can possibly spend it.
* Now having the amount in hand, the next step is to check the `has_input_rules` flag from `TxInSummary`. We know that
  this flag is accurate because the consensus enclave checks the `TxSummary` and can see which inputs actually have rules.

>   If there are no rules, then we know that we must be signing for this transaction. If there are rules then we attribute

Reviewer: signing for this transaction or for this input?

Author: thanks

This observation applies no matter what future kinds of `InputRules` we create.

However, because of the threat model, we may be concerned that a malicious host computer would arbitrarily attach empty input rules to the user's inputs,
in order to confuse the hardware wallet signing device, and cause it to display "self" inputs as "swap counterparty" inputs. And could similarly do so for
outputs.

The following analysis explains why these attempts fail:
* For `TxOut`'s, the decision tree is specified so that we view-key match it first, and if it matches to use, we short circuit and declare it to be
  a credit to ourself, regardless of whether it is associated to input rules.
* For inputs, simply attaching input rules to an input, and then later asking the device to sign it as if there are no input rules, will not work.
  In MCIP 31, inputs that have associated input rules have to sign a different digest that does not depend on the entire Tx. If instead the entire Tx
  digest is signed, then the transaction will fail validation.

There is an additional possibility: Suppose that the hardware wallet has features that also support signing the MCIP 31 SCIs. Then it could be possible

> that we authorize an sign an SCI, and then later we build a transaction that matches against it, so that we are essentially "trading with ourselves".

Reviewer: ```suggestion
that we authorize and sign an SCI, and then later we build a transaction that matches against it, so that we are essentially "trading with ourselves".
```
